this video is brought to you by
brilliant on Tuesday president-elect
Donald Trump announced the creation of a
new Department of government efficiency
to be headed up by Tesla CEO Elon Musk
and former Republican presidential
candidate Vivic ramaswami in a post on
Truth social Trump suggested the new
Department would partner with the White
House Office of budget and management or
OMB to trim down government spending
suggesting it could even become the
Manhattan Project of our time this was
actually something must talked about a
fair bit during the latter stages of the
campaign and his stated plans are
ambitious during a campaign rally in New
York last month he claimed he wanted to
trim $2 trillion off the $7 trillion
federal budget which if it happened
would push the us into its first budget
surplus since
2001 originally it was unclear what sort
of timeline musk was imagining here but
Trump's announcement said that the
Department's work would be done no later
than July the 4th 2026 which musk has
basically 18 months to do what he can so
in this video we're going to have a look
at musk's Javier Mill style plan to trim
down the American state and whether he
can actually
succeed before we start if you haven't
already please consider subscribing and
ringing the bell to stay in the loop and
be notified when we release new
videos so let's start by explaining why
the US might need to trim down the
federal government when musk talks about
why he thinks the US needs a department
of government efficiency he broadly
gives two reasons the first is that
America is in his words going bankrupt
in other words the federal government is
spending a lot more money than it takes
in which means America's national debt
is now reaching unsustainable levels in
the 2024 fiscal year which runs between
October 2023 and September 2024 the US
ran a deficit of $11.83
trillion this equates to a about 6.4% of
GDP which is an absolutely enormous
number by peacetime standards for
context over the past 50 years the US
deficit has averaged about
3.8% and the only other time the US has
run a deficit this large was in the
immediate aftermath of the financial
crisis and during the pandemic
successive and Rising deficits mean that
the US national debt has risen to over
120% of GDP according to Federal Reserve
data these are pretty scary numbers by
themselves but things have been made
quite a lot worse by the recent rise in
interest rates not only does this mean
that fresh borrowing is more expensive
but it also means that servicing
pre-existing debt I.E paying interest
payments on the tens of trillions of
dollars of outstanding debt accounts for
an Ever growing fraction of government
revenues according to the IMF debt
servicing costs now account for over 15%
of all US government spending nearly
triple the G7 average this means the US
is spending more on interest payments
than on defense or Medicare the worry
here is that the US gets caught in a
sort of debt servicing spiral whereby
the US has to borrow more and more money
to service its debt but this means more
debt so more debt servicing which forces
more borrowing at infinum on top of all
this Trump's fiscal plans which include
massive tax cuts will probably make
things a lot worse the nonpartisan
committee for a responsible federal
budget explains that his stated policies
would add another $8 trillion to the
national debt over the next 10 years
pushing the deficit up to 10% of GDP
there's also the risk that the US gets
caught in another vicious cycle as
sustained government spending stucks
inflation which discourages the Federal
Reserve from cutting interest rates
which means more spending in the form of
higher debt servicing costs anyway
that's the first reason musk worries
that without significant Cuts in
government spending the federal
government is at risk of going bankrupt
but the second reason musk often gives
is his belief that excessive regulation
and government bureaucracy st's economic
growth musk therefore believes that if
he can successfully reduce government
waste he'll be able to bring America's
debt GDP ratio down by both decreasing
the numerator and increasing the
denominator in other words reducing
borrowing and increasing GDP in the same
vein musk also believes that a lot of
government spending is wasteful spent in
employing people to do useless things or
even nothing when they could otherwise
be doing productive work in the private
sector although it's worth noting that
while there's obviously going to be some
wasteful spending in a $7 trillion
budget the US actually has a pretty
small state by International standards
according to the most recent IMF data
for instance government spending
amounted to 37.5% of GDP in
2024 by Far and Away the lowest in the
G7 so that's why musk wants to cut down
the American state but can he actually
do it well cutting $2 trillion off the
budget before mid 2026 would be
immensely difficult and would almost
definitely require cuts to Social
Security Medicare and the defense budget
cuts to these big government programs
require Congressional approval and even
though Republicans have majorities in
both the House and Senate this doesn't
mean he'll be able to get these cuts
through last month for instance
Republican senator Rand Paul proposed a
bill that would cut spending by 6% a
year every year until the US budget is
balanced but it was voted down by a 56
to39 majority which included Republican
Hawks who didn't want to see defense
spending cut it was for this reason that
Trump failed to cut spending on
Affordable Care Act Insurance subsidies
in his first term along with other
agency Cuts musk and Trump could instead
Target so-called discretionary spending
outlays that are not permanently
enshrined in law but have to be voted on
every year by Congress discretionary
spending accounted for about $1.7
trillion in 2023 but about half of that
went on defense and much of it is spent
on paying Federal salaries ultimately
cutting the federal budget by 30% in 18
months would be immensely painful
however must does it and the only place
anyone has tried anything remotely
similar is Argentina where president
Javier Mill has cut the federal budget
by 35% in just a year shutting down 13
government Ministries and sacking about
10% of all civil servants but while
melee's plans have sort of worked the
government ran a monthly budget surplus
for the first time earli this year
they've also triggered a deep recession
with GDP shrinking by about 3% this year
and the poverty rate now above 50% while
this is something musk has been
remarkably candid about admitting in a
virtual town hall on X that his planned
reductions would quote necessarily
involve some temporary hardship Trump
might not be so Keen on it given he's
the one who will suffer the political
repercussions it's also worth saying
that this is where the Argentina analogy
collapses Argentinian voters elected
melee knowing that they were asking for
some short-term pain whereas Trump
campaigned promising an immediate
economic boom with tax cuts and lower
inflation now as a tldr viewer it's
clear that you have a thirst for
learning after all why else would you
have watched a 10-minute video
explaining what musk's new department is
now if you want to continue your
Learning Journey you really should check
out brilliant brilliant is the online
learning platform where you learn by
doing with thousands of interactive
lessons in maths data analysis
programming and AI these Hands-On
lessons have you comparing circuits to
understand voltage and current playing
snooker to learn the rules of collision
planning your itinerary for an
Intergalactic Music Festival on A
Spacetime diagram and more that way
you'll build your natural intuition
while gaining deep knowledge of
scientific principles in fact brilliant
actually recently launched tons of new
data science content all of which uses
real world data to help you see Trends
and make better informed decisions and
don't worry you don't need to be a
world-renowned scientist to understand
these courses either Brilliance courses
are designed for Learners of any level
find out more and to try everything
brilliant has to offer for free for a
full 30 days visit brilliant.org
tldr or click the link in the
description you'll also get 20% off an
anual premium subscription thanks for
your support and thanks to brilliant for
supporting this video